Title: Who Gets to Speak for Energy? The World Energy Council as a Spokesorganisation for the 'Global Energy Economy' (1924-1990)

Abstract: This article explores the history of the World Energy Council (WEC, formerly World Power Conference and World Energy Conference) between 1924 and 1990 against the backdrop of an emerging field of energy politics. Drawing on the concept of technocratic internationalism, it argues that this international non-governmental organisation exerted influence on the creation of an international statistical and regulatory infrastructure that established this field. Decades before a comparative view on resources as 'energies' was institutionalized in national politics, the WEC promoted this perspective as serving a global public –  the 'global energy economy'. When intergovernmental organisations finally took on this view in the 1950s and again in the 1970s, the WEC continued to serve as a platform for these international organisations, national energy agencies, and large energy companies. 

Keywords: technocratic internationalism, energy history, international non-governmental organisations, history of economic thought, engineering organisations

-------------------------------

National politics and the 'global energy economy' have not always gotten along so well. In fact, the World Energy Council (WEC),1 an international non-governmental organisation, grew out of an techno-internationalist spirit that was highly skeptical of national politics. Its founder was Daniel N. Dunlop, a British electrotechnical engineer with an inclination for anthroposophical ideas2 who had helped to found the British Electrical and Allied Manufacturers' Association (BEAMA) in 1911. In 1924, he summoned all "practical men, scientists, engineers, manufacturers, financiers and politicians” to the first World Energy Conference in London.3 Initially, he had hoped to set up a World Economic Conference.4  For Dunlop, the 'World Economy' was an emphatic expression and a humanist project to be pursued against all national politics. However, such a project appeared to be a forlorn hope in the years after World War I:  

“I could see clearly that it was impossible to bring together politicians, and as all the important economic decisions are in the hands of politicians, it was hopeless to found an international economic body as a first step. But it was possible to bring together human beings in the field of technical questions (...).”5

Hence he set out to do what came closest to his original idea: create an organisation that would study the natural foundation of all things economic. Questions of power transcended national problems just like energy spilled over national boundaries.6 Initiated by an electrotechnical engineer, the WEC stressed its political and industrial neutrality. Neither a nation, nor any single industry should prevail in the organisation. Akira Iriye's observation that the international organisations of the 1920s shared an interest to “earnestly (...) work together to solve problems that faced the whole world”7 holds true for the WEC as well. Questions of power resources seemed to be the most urgent. Representing neither governments nor a specific industry, the WEC purported to be a neutral spokesorganisation for the 'global power economy'. But what can that mean?   

By answering this question, I seek to contribute to three debates. First, I try to better understand the role of international non-governmental organisations in the history of globalisation. Craig N. Murphy has established a relationship between global industrial change and the intergovernmental organisations regulating and standardizing the ‘lead’ technologies of a certain time.8 The history of the WEC shows how professional, business and scientific associations initiated or influenced standard-setting and regulation through international non-governmental organisations. Just like the intergovernmental International Telegraph Union (ITU) and the non-governmental International Electrotechnical Congresses (IntElec, institutionalized into a commission in 1906) the WEC was founded in the context of the rise of electricity and the emerging field of transnational corporations, public utilities, professions and technologies related to it. However, in contrast to the ITU and IntElec, the WEC's activities were never limited to electricity or any other technology. While the WEC sought to influence international standard setting, it never acted as a standardizing or regulating body itself. Instead, it successfully initiated standardisation from the point of view of the ‘energy economy’ - decades before this perspective became inscribed and institutionalized in national politics.

The second contribution refers to a more specific debate in the historiography of a technologically or economically driven ‘internationalism’. In recent years, scholarly attention has shifted to the economic commissions, technical committees and scientific organisations within or outside the League or UN system.1 These works argue that these seemingly neutral spaces were often as important arenas for international conflict and cooperation as the explicitly political institutions.2 In this context, scholars have also paid attention to engineering organisations and their imagination of international co-operation. Elisabeth van Meer distinguishes between a ‘technocratic internationalism’ calling for the association and political engagement of all engineers in a technological world society and a more narrow ‘engineering internationalism’ focusing  on technical exchange for business purposes.3 For van Meer, the World Engineering Federation and the World Power Conference embody this difference. In general, the WEC remains little studied, even though historians have frequently used its conference proceedings as sources.4 Van Meer reconstructs its position almost only from the side of the WEF and the two existing histories of the WEC were authorized by the organisation itself on the occasion of its anniversaries.5 The most widely cited work, Wright et al.'s From World Power Conference to World Energy Council, is very valuable and this article draws on it extensively. While it does a great job in putting the organisation in historical context by bringing together a variety of newspaper and other sources, it simply buys into van Meer’s distinction. I argue that a closer look at the WEC calls this distinction into question: The WEC's energetic and economic internationalism does not simply represent business interests, but was no less imagined as serving a public good – the 'global energy economy'.  

This leads over to the last contribution. This article seeks to motivate a global history of energy that understands ‘energy’ as a field of political, technological and economic activities emerging over the twentieth century. Even though ‘energy’ has a clear-cut physical definition, the boundaries of this field of ‘energetic’ action do not coincide with the physical concept. What was considered a ‘source of energy’ from the economic, technical and political point of view was never self-evident. This can be exemplified by two transformations: In Soviet energetics, and more generally until the second half of the twentieth century, human labor was considered a part of the ‘energy economy’. 'Energy' was not yet narrowed down to a technically mediated changeability of nature, but had a much more general meaning. Another major transformation was the quantitative determination of the field. Around the turn of the century, ‘energy’ was not yet a common measure of the oil, coal, and electricity industry. In a vague sense, they were of course called 'energies', just like the sun, animal, and human labor, but there was not yet a determined functional relation between them. They were all substances, but not variables of one function of energy.6 Therefore, the WEC cannot simply be understood as an international non-governmental organisation in the field of ‘energy’. In arguing for standardisation, compiling statistics, and studying the laws of ‘energy’ and economic growth, it played an active role in forging this very ‘energetic’ perspective. 

This article seeks to relate the WEC's activities to a broader global historical perspective by analyzing the organisation's claim to represent 'the global energy economy'. By a more comprehensive inclusion of the available sources,7 I seek to contribute to a better understanding of how international non-governmental organisations have shaped global politics, the processes that have led to the emergence of a field of global energy policy, and the kind of imagination of global engineering co-operation prevalent in the WEC. 



